Joining Fetch (#638)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

* Too Many Subscribes: The session was closed because the subscriber used
  a Subscribe ID equal or larger than the current Maximum Subscribe ID.

* Invalid Subscribe ID: The session was closed because the subscriber sent
  a Joining Fetch with a Subscribe ID that does not exist.

> * GOAWAY Timeout: The session was closed because the client took too long to

Author: Looks like a one word change (from f89745d) was lost in a rebase here maybe?

```suggestion
* GOAWAY Timeout: The session was closed because the peer took too long to
```

all available Objects. If there are gaps between Objects, the publisher omits them from the
fetch response. All omitted objects have status Object Not Available.

**Fetch Types**

There are two types of Fetch messages:

Standalone Fetch (0x1) : A Fetch of Objects performed independently of any Subscribe.

Joining Fetch (0x2) : A Fetch joined together with a Subscribe. A Joining Fetch
shares the same Subscribe ID as an already-sent Subscribe. A publisher receiving a Joining
Fetch should use properties of the associated Subscribe to determine the Track Namespace,

> Track, StartGroup, StartObject, EndGroup, and EndObject for the Joining Fetch such that it is

Reviewer: I don't think EndGroup and EndObject are used by the joining fetch.

Author: Say more? The Fetch has to end somewhere.

Reviewer: nvm I misread the text.  I thought you were using the End* from the Subscribe for something.

  Type (i) = 0x16,
  Length (i),
  Subscribe ID (i),
  Subscriber Priority (8),
  Fetch Type (i),
  [Track Namespace (tuple),
   Track Name Length (i),
   Track Name (..),
   Group Order (8),
   StartGroup (i),
   StartObject (i),
   EndGroup (i),
   EndObject (i),]
  [Previous Group Count (i),]
  Number of Parameters (i),
  Parameters (..) ...
}
~~~
{: #moq-transport-fetch-format title="MOQT FETCH Message"}

Fields common to all Fetch Types:

* Subscribe ID: The Subscribe ID identifies a given fetch request. Subscribe ID
is a variable length integer that MUST be unique and monotonically increasing

> within  a session. For a Standalone Fetch a new Subscribe ID MUST be used. For

Reviewer: nit: extra space 'within  a'

> within  a session. For a Standalone Fetch a new Subscribe ID MUST be used. For

Author: ```suggestion
within a session. For a Standalone Fetch a new Subscribe ID MUST be used. For
```

a Joining Fetch, the Subscribe ID MUST correspond to a Subscribe which has already
been sent. If a publisher receives a Joining Fetch with a Subscribe ID that does
not correspond to an existing Subscribe, it MUST close the session with an

> Invalid Subscribe ID error.

Reviewer 2: Closing the session seems a bit drastic. Wouldn't you just respond with a FETCH_ERROR?

* EndObject: The end Object ID, plus 1. A value of 0 means the entire group is
requested.

Field present only for Joining Fetch (0x2):

> * Previous Group Count: The number of groups to Fetch prior to the StartGroup of the corresponding Subscribe

Reviewer 2: Are there limits on this value? Is zero allowed? Is 1000 allowed? Is -1 allowed?

Author: Consolidating [discussion](https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/638#discussion_r1870922477) of this point.
> For simplicity, we should disallow PGC = 0. It essentially overlaps the FETCH with the SUBSCRIBE. Forcing PGC >= 1 seems cleaner.

I'm in favor of allowing "Preceding Group Offset" = 0 so that we can have the option of using Fetch to retrieve the first portion of a group when Subscribe(LatestObject) is used to retrieve the rest. The updated text hopefully makes it clear that the Fetch and Subscribe do not overlap.

>  Is 1000 allowed?

Yes. Depending on how group ID are set for a given track this may make sense. 

That said, it is not necessarily advisable to use a Joining Fetch to Fetch a large number of groups. In that case it may be better to wait for Subscribe OK and then make a series of smaller Fetch requests to fill the desired range.

I'm not opposed to putting some kind of limit on this value, but it's hard to say what it ought to be for all circumstances. I think it may be better to just allow publishers to reject joining fetch requests with PGOs larger than they wish to fulfill by responding with a Fetch Error. (I just created a separate issue about defining more error codes: https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/issues/644)

> Is -1 allowed?

No. This field is defined as `[Preceding Group Offset (i),]` and this [Variable-Length Integer Encoding](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9000#name-variable-length-integer-enc) does not permit negative values.

> * Previous Group Count: The number of groups to Fetch prior to the StartGroup of the corresponding Subscribe

Reviewer 3: Since joining fetch is using an existing subscription, we should just specify the group_id to start from . My proposal is to use absolute group Id rather than counts.

Reviewer 2: The trouble with that proposal to use use absolute group Id rather than an offset, is that the information for the current live edge, obtained from SUBSCRIBE_OK, has to propagate back to the client before it can calculate an absolute join point for the fetch. This incurs an extra RTT in join time, which is what we are trying to avoid with this FETCH improvement. 

By using a relative offset, the client can issue the SUBSCRIBE and FETCH together, avoiding the 1xRTT delay.

descending. Within each group, objects are sent in Object ID order;
subgroup ID is not used for ordering.

### Calculating the Range of a Joining Fetch

A publisher which receives a Fetch message with a Fetch Type of 0x2 must treat it as a Fetch
with a range dynamically determined by the Preceding Group Offset (PGO) field and values derived
from to the corresponding Subscribe message (hereafter "the Subscribe").

The following values are used:

* Resolved Subscribe Start Group:

>   * For Subscribes with Filter Type LatestObject or LatestGroup, this is equal to Largest Group ID.

Reviewer: I think we need to resolve what's going on with Subscribe(LatestGroup).  Options:

1) Remove it (it splits past and future)
2) Subscribe(LatestGroup) is identical to Subscribe(LatestObject) + Joining Fetch(PGO=0) -- it sends a Subscribe Ok, a FetchOK, a Fetch stream and any future subgroups.
3) Special rules for publishers/relays that definitively have the entire current group cached

I guess it can be in another PR.

Author: I agree. I've tried to write this PR in a way where 1 is a viable option, but I think that actually modifying Subscribe should be done in a separate PR.

Reviewer: I agree.  I'll wait for this to land since I don't think it will impact the decision and then open a separate issue.

Author: @ianswett if we pursue 1 here, does Joining Fetch seem less awkward?

  * For Subscribes with Filter Type AbsoluteStart or AbsoluteRange, this is equal to the StartGroup field of the Subscribe message
* Resolved Subscribe Start Object:
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type LatestObject, this is equal to Largest Object ID.
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type LatestGroup, this is 0
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type AbsoluteStart or AbsoluteRange, this is equal to the StartObject field of the Subscribe message
* Preceding Group Offset: A field in the Joining Fetch message indicating the relative offset from the start of the Subscribe

> Note: If a relay does not yet have LatestGroup and LatestObject for a given track, it may choose to either forward both the Subscribe and

Reviewer: There's a non-normative 'may' - suggest 'can'.

I like leaving some flexibility here. 

The case I brought up in the interim (SUBSCRIBE_OK seen but with contentExists=false) implicitly goes to "wait until you can resolve fetch locally" because you cannot send another SUBSCRIBE upstream.  Maybe we could say a bit more here.

Author: Good catch, switched that to 'can'. 

Do we want to suggest behavior for particular cases like the one you describe?
The other one we discussed as seeming fairly straightforward is the case of receiving a Joining Fetch that joins to the first Subscribe for a track. Since the relay would send a new Subscribe upstream in that case, it could also forward the Joining Fetch so that the join point is resolved at the upstream publisher.

That said, the exact details of how relays choose to handle aggregation may vary from implementation to implementation and I agree with Will's sentiments that it would not be good to be too prescriptive here. If we spell out specific scenarios where a relay _can_ choose to take a particular course of action, does that make this note sound more normative than it should be? Or is just avoiding normative language (i.e. sticking to 'can' instead of MAY/MUST/SHOULD) sufficient?

I'll take a stab at spelling out these two cases non-normatively if folks think that makes sense.

Reviewer 2: I'd replace 

> Note: If a relay does not yet have LatestGroup and LatestObject for a given track, it can choose to either forward both the Subscribe and the Joining Fetch upstream or to wait until the Joining Fetch can be resolved locally. In either case, the Resolved Subscribe Start values for a Joining Fetch MUST correspond to the Subscribe within the same session so the Fetch and Subscribe can be contiguous and non-overlapping.

with

> The Resolved Subscribe Start values for a Joining Fetch MUST correspond to the referenced Subscribe so that the Objects delivered across the Fetch and Subscribe are contiguous and non-overlapping.

Author: I like that @wilaw - simple and to the point, thanks!

@afrind @fluffy do either of you feel it's necessary to spell out the cases outlined above or could we just go with something like Will's suggestion, focusing on only the normative requirement and omitting reference to what will likely be implementation-specific behavior to meet that requirement?

Reviewer: I liked your language "within the same session" because it made clear that the resolution had to be on the same endpoint.

I think the "already subscribed upstream, content-exists=false' case warrants a sentence explaining what to do.  Eg if the relay sends SUBSCRIBE_OK with content-exists=false, it MUST send a FETCH_ERROR for the joining fetch.

Author: Incorporated these suggestions, thanks!

> Note: If a relay does not yet have LatestGroup and LatestObject for a given track, it may choose to either forward both the Subscribe and

Author: ```suggestion
Note: If a relay does not yet have LatestGroup and LatestObject for a given track, it can choose to either forward both the Subscribe and
```

> the Joining Fetch upstream or to watch until the Joining Fetch can be resolved locally. However it is handled, the Resolved Subscribe Start values

Author: ```suggestion
the Joining Fetch upstream or to wait until the Joining Fetch can be resolved locally. In either case, the Resolved Subscribe Start values
```

all available Objects. If there are gaps between Objects, the publisher omits them from the
fetch response. All omitted objects have status Object Does Not Exist.

**Fetch Types**

There are two types of Fetch messages:

Standalone Fetch (0x1) : A Fetch of Objects performed independently of any Subscribe.

Joining Fetch (0x2) : A Fetch joined together with a Subscribe. A Joining Fetch

> shares the same Subscribe ID as an already-sent Subscribe. A publisher receiving a

Reviewer 4: I think we should use a new Subscribe ID for this and put the id of the already-sent Subscribe as one of the paramaters

Reviewer 5: That does seem reasonable, though admittedly I don't have a strong opinion.

Reviewer: Individual Comment:

Having separate subscribe IDs for the join and fetch might reduce the chance of getting them mixed up at some point.  If it's not required that they're the same, maybe this is a good approach.

Author: I don't feel especially strongly one way or the other here either. I think the reason we originally shared the ID here was mostly about opportunistically saving a field. There may be some other benefits, too, but I'm happy to separate them if that's the way most folks are leaning.

Reviewer 5: I don't think saving a varint is a good reason to have them be the same, given how infrequently this will be sent.

> Joining Fetch should use properties of the associated Subscribe to determine the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Joining Fetch uses properties of the associated Subscribe to determine the
```

descending. Within each group, objects are sent in Object ID order;
subgroup ID is not used for ordering.

A publisher which receives a Fetch message with a Fetch Type of 0x2 should treat it as a Fetch
with the following fields dynamically determined from the corresponding Subscribe:

* Track Namespace: Same as in the corresponding Subscribe

> * Track Name: Same as in the corresponding SUBSCRIBE

Author: ```suggestion
* Track Name: Same as in the corresponding Subscribe
```

> * StartGroup: LatestGroup as determined for the SUBSCRIBE minus PreviousGroups from the JOIN

Author: ```suggestion
* StartGroup: LatestGroup as determined for the Subscribe minus Previous Groupe Count from the Joining Fetch
```

> * StartGroup: LatestGroup as determined for the Subscribe minus Previous Groupe Count from the Joining Fetch

Reviewer: spelling: Groupe

> * StartGroup: LatestGroup as determined for the Subscribe minus Previous Groupe Count from the Joining Fetch

Reviewer: How does it work if the relay has no content for the subscription yet?  Does it wait for the first published object to resolve the joining fetch?

Author: If the relay does not have an active upstream subscription for the track already then I think it should probably forward both the Subscribe and the Joining Fetch upstream.

If it hasn't seen the Subscribe ID yet within this downstream session, then that's an error (Invalid Subscribe ID).

Reviewer: I'm asking about the case that the upstream subscribe OK has arrived but no content has been produced yet.

Reviewer: The Largest group/object are *optional* in Subscribe OK:

> ContentExists: 1 if an object has been published on this track, 0 if not. If 0, then the Largest Group ID and Largest Object ID fields will not be present. Any other value is a protocol error and MUST terminate the session with a Protocol Violation ([Section 3.5](https://moq-wg.github.io/moq-transport/draft-ietf-moq-transport.html#session-termination)).

> * StartGroup: LatestGroup as determined for the Subscribe minus Previous Groupe Count from the Joining Fetch

Reviewer: I'll note that "Previous Group Count" is doing subtraction on group IDs and applications need to be generally aware what will happen based on the publisher's group ID scheme.  Eg: if the publisher is using group IDs (1000, 2000, 3000), PGC=1 has no effect.

Author: This is a good point. If group IDs are not contiguous (currently allowed) then "count" in this name cannot be an accurate name. Maybe we need a different name here to avoid confusion.

Reviewer 2: Maybe call it "Group ID offset"? You can specify an offset of 2000, so it the subscribe returns a latest group of 16000 then you would start the fetch at 16000 - 2000 = 14000

> * StartGroup: LatestGroup as determined for the Subscribe minus Previous Groupe Count from the Joining Fetch

Author: ```suggestion
* StartGroup: LatestGroup as determined for the Subscribe minus Previous Group Count from the Joining Fetch
```

> 

Reviewer 3: same comment on using absolute group Id to fetch from than using count, as it assumes properties on the group distribution.

Reviewer 2: Start Group **IS** already an absolute group ID. As the text indicates, it is the Latest Group ID from the subscribe (which is absolute) minus the relative offset provided by the Joining Fetch.

* StartObject: Always 0

> * EndGroup: StartGroup of the corresponding SUBSCRIBE minus 1 (double check minus 1)

Author: ```suggestion
* EndGroup: StartGroup of the corresponding Subscribe minus 1 (double check minus 1)
```

> * EndGroup: StartGroup of the corresponding Subscribe minus 1 (double check minus 1)

Reviewer 2: Editorial - remove your note to "double check minus 1"

Reviewer 2: For simplicity, we should disallow PGC = 0. It essentially overlaps the FETCH with the SUBSCRIBE. Forcing PGC >= 1 seems cleaner.

> * EndGroup: StartGroup of the corresponding Subscribe minus 1 (double check minus 1)

Reviewer 3: The end group must just be the latest group at the publisher when retrieving the joining fetch.

Reviewer 2: The current definition of End Group for FETCH is inclusive, as is the definition of Largest Group ID for SUBSCRIBE. So they cannot be the same number or else that group will sent twice - once as part of the subscribe and again for the fetch. 

The problem with minus 1 is that Group IDs may not be contiguous. IF group numbers are every 1000 and you FETCH 5000 - 15999, the relay will need to go back to original publisher to determine if an object exists between 15001 and 15999.

Author: As discussed on the call today, non-contiguous group IDs do still present some issues like this, but the same issues also exist for standalone fetch. Since a joining fetch is defined as resolving to the equivalent to a standalone fetch, I suggest that we address concerns about non-contiguous group IDs separately from this PR. 

It looks like we already have a couple open issues about how Group IDs are defined so I don't think we need another issue to track this case specifically. (See https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/issues/423, https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/issues/358, for example)

> * EndGroup: StartGroup of the corresponding Subscribe minus 1 (double check minus 1)

Reviewer: With this definition you can have EndGroup < StartGroup --

SUBSCRIBE(10, 0)
JOINING_FETCH(1)
SUBSCRIBE_OK(20, 0)

StartGroup = 19
EndGroup = 9

At least you can if StartGroup in the past is not an error, which I don't think it should be based on how hard it is to guess where Latest is.

Author: Whoops! Good point! I see now that I forgot to resolve my `(double check minus 1)` TODO before submitting this PR and also left some confusing mixed use of LatestGroup and StartGroup here. The intent is to define the fields of the Fetch range to be prior to and contiguous, but non-overlapping with the _resolved_ starting point of the corresponding Subscribe.

Here's the relevant text from the editor's draft's section on Fetch:

> Fetch specifies an inclusive range of Objects starting at StartObject
> in StartGroup and ending at EndObject in EndGroup. EndGroup and EndObject MUST
> specify the same or a later object than StartGroup and StartObject.

> If StartGroup/StartObject is greater than the latest published Object group, the publisher MUST return FETCH_ERROR with error code 'No Objects'.

and Subscribe (as it currently stands):

> Latest Group (0x1) : Specifies an open-ended subscription with objects from the beginning of the current group. If no content has been delivered yet, the subscription starts with the first published or received group.

> Latest Object (0x2): Specifies an open-ended subscription beginning from the current object of the current group. If no content has been delivered yet, the subscription starts with the first published or received group.

> AbsoluteStart (0x3): Specifies an open-ended subscription beginning from the object identified in the StartGroup and StartObject fields. If the StartGroup is prior to the current group, the publisher MUST reply with a SUBSCRIBE_ERROR with code 'Invalid Range'.

> AbsoluteRange (0x4): Specifies a closed subscription starting at StartObject in StartGroup and ending at EndObject in EndGroup. The start and end of the range are inclusive. EndGroup MUST specify the same or a later group than StartGroup. If the StartGroup is prior to the current group, the publisher MUST reply with a SUBSCRIBE_ERROR with code 'Invalid Range'.

and Subscribe OK:

> Largest Group ID: The largest Group ID available for this track. This field is only present if ContentExists has a value of 1.

> Largest Object ID: The largest Object ID available within the largest Group ID for this track. This field is only present if ContentExists has a value of 1.

So, at present it's not permitted to send a Subscribe (AbsoluteStart or AbsoluteRange) with a Group ID < Largest Group ID, even though you can't definitively know what that is ahead of time.

Author: That said, I think we do still need to clarify this a bit further...

If we consider the case of Latest Group, then our "resolved StartGroup" for the Subscribe will == Largest Group ID and our "resolved StartObject" will == 0.

If we consider the case of Latest Object, then our "resolved StartGroup" will == Largest Group ID and our "resolved StartObject" will == Largest Object ID? Maybe? Or will the first object a subscriber receives from the Subscribe be Largest Object ID plus one? Let's assume for now the latter is true because we want to move in the direction of treating Subscribe more like an entry in a forwarding table and handle already "known" / "cached" objects with Fetch.

Examples:

Groups of 30 objects (0 through 29)
Contiguous, monotonically incrementing Group IDs
Largest Group ID = 20
Largest Object ID = 5

Subscribe(LatestObject) gets 20-6, 20-7, 20-8, ...
Fetch(JoiningFetch,PGC=1) gets 19-0, 19-1, 19-2, ..., 19-29, 20-0, 20-1, ... 20-5
Fetch(JoiningFetch,PGC=0) gets 20-0, 20-1, 20-2, ..., 20-5

And since we still have LatestGroup, let's look at that, too:
Subscribe(LatestGroup) gets: 20-0, 20-1, 20-2, ...
Fetch(JoiningFetch,PGC=1) gets: 19-0, 19-1, 19-2, ... 19-29
Fetch(JoiningFetch,PGC=0) gets: nothing, but not an error?

You wouldn't want to send PGC=0 with a LatestGroup Subscribe, but we'd have a similar case whenever Largest Object ID happens to fall on a group boundary so we should handle it gracefully.

I'll make a pass a rewriting this to match these examples and use "Largest Group ID" / "Largest Object ID" as our  points of reference since we have those defined for Subscribe OK already.

Author: As I'm revising these definitions, I've realized that there's an annoying boundary case we need to handle. 

Thinking aloud about how best to handle it...

Example:

Groups of 30 objects (0 through 29)
Contiguous, monotonically incrementing Group IDs
Largest Group ID = 20
Largest Object ID = 29

Assuming a Subscribe with Filter Type LatestObject gets the next object _after_ (Largest Group ID, Largest Object ID) then...

Subscribe(LatestObject) gets 21-0, 21-1, 21-2, ...
Fetch(JoiningFetch,PGC=1) "should" get 20-0, 20-1, 20-2, ..., 20-29
Fetch(JoiningFetch,PGC=0) "should" get nothing (because the subscribe already starts at an object 0)

But we can't know ahead of time that 29 is the last object in the group.

If we define our Joining Fetch range purely in terms relative to (Largest Group ID, Largest Object ID) consistently with the other examples above we'd end up fetching an entire extra Group.

Subscribe(LatestObject) gets 21-0, 21-1, 21-2, ...
Fetch(JoiningFetch,PGC=1) gets 19-0, 19-1, 19-2, ..., 20-29
Fetch(JoiningFetch,PGC=0) gets 20-0, ..., 20-29

I think the simplest option would be to just accept that and say that the subscriber can always cancel the Fetch portion if we get "lucky" and find the Subscribe has given us what we need (an Object ID 0 and "sufficient" buffer depth for our purposes - which might be zero if we _really_ want to live on the edge).

In the future maybe we could consider a further optimization with a different Fetch Type that allows the _publisher_ to cancel the Fetch as soon as any Object ID 0 is sent, but there are only some circumstances in which that would be useful, and I don't think it's likely the common case for most live streaming applications.

Reviewer: Individual Comment: 

I opened #639 to relax the start constraints in Subscribe.

I think with Joining Fetch, the Current Group option needs to be removed from Subscribe.  The only options should be Current Object, or a beginning or range in the future.  So I wouldn't worry to much about how Joining Fetch interacts with it.

> ... I think the simplest option would be to just accept that

I think so too.  In some ways this is the risk posed to a subscriber using Joining Fetch.  Depending on the group length/buffer size you may want to wait for Subscribe OK and issue the Fetch yourself.  As you say, the subscriber can cancel the Fetch too, so let's keep this PR as simple as possible.

> * EndObject: StartObject of the corresponding SUBSCRIBE minus 1 (double check minus 1)

Author: ```suggestion
* EndObject: StartObject of the corresponding Subscribe minus 1 (double check minus 1)
```

> A Joining Fetch MUST be sent in ascending group order.

Reviewer: Seems like we should allow an order param here, right?

Author: The omission was intentional. I think the use cases we're serving here will all want "ascending" order. It seemed better to have a smaller and simpler message.

I'm not wholly opposed to re-adding that field to Joining Fetch if there are use cases for it, but another option could be to add another Fetch Type down the road if we find use cases that need different behavior here.

Reviewer 2: > I thought I heard a use-case like filling backwards and cancelling as soon as the sum of the buffered data == playback buffer size.

Players would know the starting buffer they want before they JOIN FETCH, so the notion of asking for more than that seems like a non-use case and doesn't lead to any faster startup.

Using that information and the following algorithm, these values are computed:

* Fetch Start Group: The StartGroup for the Fetch
* Fetch Start Object: The StartObject for the Fetch (always 0)
* Fetch End Group: The EndGroup for the Fetch
* Fetch End Object: The EndObject for the Fetch (represented as 1 more than the end Object ID
  or a value of 0 indicating that the entire group is requested)

The publisher receiving a Joining Fetch computes the fetch range as follows:

If ContentExists is not 1 and Largest Group ID and Largest Object ID are not available, a relay SHOULD
forward the Fetch with the 0x2 Fetch Type upstream.

* Fetch Start Group: Resolved Subscribe Start Group - Preceding Group Offset
* Fetch Start Object: 0

If Resolved Subscribe Start Object is 0:
* Fetch End Group: Resolved Subscribe Start Group - 1
* Fetch End Object: 0 (all objects in the group)

Else, if Resolved Subscribe Start Object is 1 or more:
* Fetch End Group: Resolved Subscribe Start Group
* Fetch End Object: Resolved Subscribe Start Object

If Fetch End Group < Fetch Start Group no Fetch will be generated.

> (TODO: How can we signal this?)

Reviewer: If you make a FETCH with a range that results in no objects I think you get a FETCHE_ERROR?

descending. Within each group, objects are sent in Object ID order;

> subgroup ID is not used for ordering.

Reviewer 3: Looks like this paragraph is duplicated

Author: Looks like that was present before this PR, but I can fix it while I'm working in this section.

Author: Addressed in [7d4a99d](https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/638/commits/7d4a99dbddc0c513bcbfb4355a474fd354adb9e6)

### Calculating the Range of a Joining Fetch

A publisher which receives a Fetch message with a Fetch Type of 0x2 must treat it as a Fetch
with a range dynamically determined by the Preceding Group Offset (PGO) field and values derived
from to the corresponding Subscribe message (hereafter "the Subscribe").

The following values are used:

* Resolved Subscribe Start Group:
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type Latest Object or Latest Group, this is equal to Largest Group ID.
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type AbsoluteStart or AbsoluteRange, this is equal to the StartGroup field of the Subscribe message
* Resolved Subscribe Start Object:
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type Latest Object, this is equal to Largest Object ID.
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type Latest Group, this is 0

>   * For Subscribes with Filter Type AbsoluteStart or AbsoluteRange, this is equal to the StartObject field of the Subscribe message

Reviewer 3: This section seems to repeat the text to some extent in subscribe section. When PR https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/652 lands, some of these values may not match exactly especially when subscription filters are in the past to the live edge.

My proposal would be to refer to Subscribe section for these filter types and not repeat the text.

Author: I first wrote this with the relevant details collapsed into the below section and it was very verbose and hard to follow. I split it out by defining these intermediate "Resolved" values for clarity. I see your point about duplication, and you're right that #652 may also need to touch this, but I still prefer to state these things explicitly here to avoid confusion about how Joining Fetch values should be determined. Maybe @ianswett can weigh in as both editor and author of #652.

Reviewer 3: My only concern is #652 will invalidate some of the resolved values as it is defined in this PR.  Given we had general agreement that Susbcribe needs updates if we add Joining Fetch, it would be nice to land these two PRs around the same time to keep things unambiguous.

* Preceding Group Offset: A field in the Joining Fetch message indicating the relative offset from the start of the Subscribe

> The Resolved Subscribe Start values for a Joining Fetch MUST correspond to the referenced Subscribe within the same session so that the Objects delivered across the Fetch and Subscribe are contiguous and non-overlapping.

Reviewer 3: not sure that we can guarantee "contigous" property but we can say it will be non-overlapping though

Author: For Joining Fetch it's important that the _ranges_ of the Fetch and Subscribe portions at least be both contiguous and non-overlapping. Actual delivery of objects will of course be subject to whatever Fetch and Subscribe each provide. Perhaps I could reword slightly to keep this scoped to the properties we care about for Joining Fetch and not overstate anything with regard to delivery?

Reviewer 3: By contiguous, if we mean groups will be in sequence with no gaps, we cannot guarantee that for variety of reasons.  Am I misunderstanding it ?

Author: Ah, I think maybe we're focusing on different things here and I think it may relate to some of your other comments, too. I'm thinking of this primarily in terms of what is being _requested_ - we can make our requests contiguous and non-overlapping, even if the way the objects are published and delivered means there could be gaps. What actually gets delivered will be subject to whatever limitations any other Subscribe and Fetch are subject to. I updated this line of the text to clarify that, too.

If a relay answers the referenced Subscribe with a `SUBSCRIBE_OK` that has ContentExists set to 0, it MUST respond to the Joining Fetch with a `FETCH_ERROR`.

> Using that information and the following algorithm, these values are computed:

Reviewer 3: s/that/above information/

> Using that information and the following algorithm, these values are computed:

Author: ```suggestion
Using the above information and the following algorithm, these values are computed:
```

* Fetch Start Group: The StartGroup for the Fetch
* Fetch Start Object: The StartObject for the Fetch (always 0)
* Fetch End Group: The EndGroup for the Fetch
* Fetch End Object: The EndObject for the Fetch (represented as 1 more than the end Object ID

>   or a value of 0 indicating that the entire group is requested)

Reviewer 3: not sure if we need these definitions here ?

Author: This is defining how these computed values are used to fill out the fields of what could otherwise be a standalone Fetch.

Reviewer 3: True .. I was wondering can't this be simplified by combining it with the next paragraph that follows

Author: On a re-read, I think you may be right. I think we can eliminate these definitions.

Author: Done in [86ec7ff](https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/638/commits/86ec7ffe924e64f75f2659862f75ae910ce9bf57).

The publisher receiving a Joining Fetch computes the fetch range as follows:

* Fetch Start Group: Resolved Subscribe Start Group - Preceding Group Offset
* Fetch Start Object: 0

> If Resolved Subscribe Start Object is 0:

Reviewer 3: s/Resolved Subscribe Start Object is 0/ Subscribe FilterType is LatestGroup

Author: That's not the only case here. This can also be true if the StartObject field of a Subscribe with Filter Type of AbsoluteStart or AbsoluteRange is 0. This is an example of why I'd prefer to retain that above section defining "Resolved Subscribe..." values rather than just referring directly to the Subscribe section's definitions.

Reviewer 3: I am fine with having the section on Resolved subscribes , but seems bit incorrect to compute those absolute values given those are filters and may not map to the exact values that we mention here

Author: As above, I'm thinking of this in terms of computing an absolute value for the _requested_ range so we can delineate which portion would be provided by a Fetch (subject to whatever limitations a standalone Fetch is subject to) and which portion would be provided by a Subscribe (subject to whatever limitations a Subscribe is subject to).

* Fetch End Group: Resolved Subscribe Start Group - 1
* Fetch End Object: 0 (all objects in the group)

Else, if Resolved Subscribe Start Object is 1 or more:
* Fetch End Group: Resolved Subscribe Start Group
* Fetch End Object: Resolved Subscribe Start Object

If Fetch End Group < Fetch Start Group respond with a Fetch Error.

> A Joining Fetch MUST be sent in ascending group order.

Reviewer 2: > A Joining Fetch MUST be sent in ascending group order.

Why? See Alan's comment [here](https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/issues/598#issuecomment-2605532478). The suggests that the client execute the FETCH in descending order and waits until it has sufficient groups to start. Those groups are the sum of those delivered by the FETCH and those delivered by the SUBSCRIBE. If you go in ascending order, you are always forced to wait for the complete range to be sent before you can stitch them together. But by going in reverse, you assemble the fastest path to your starting buffer. This should be an option for the player.

Reviewer 3: The whole point of joining fetch is solving is to have just enough buffer to have a smooth playout and not to overlap with standalone fetch use-cases. Given that, you want the preceding group offset ( of one or 2 probably) to be available fully before you start the playout and allowing just ascending order makes more sense for this usecase.

Reviewer 6: >  you want the preceding group offset ( of one or 2 probably) to be available fully before you start the playout
+
> Those groups are the sum of those delivered by the FETCH and those delivered by the SUBSCRIBE. If you go in ascending order, you are always forced to wait for the complete range to be sent before you can stitch them together. 

You can decide to start playing even if "the complete range" has not arrived yet (not "available fully" yet). You may still have a gap between the latest FETCH object you received and the earliest SUBSCRIBE object but you are confident that this gap will be filled when the playhead will reach that point. It is a Relay decision, and it can be more or less aggressive wrt to the offset (which can be 5-ish in a typical live streaming implementation).

Anyway, I don't see a strong motivation to force Ascending Order (the MUST in the sentence).

Author: > I don't see a strong motivation to force Ascending Order (the MUST in the sentence)

The main reason is really just that we wanted to omit the Group Order field in the message format for a Fetch with a Fetch Type of Joining Fetch.

I can either add Group Order back in (shifting it up into the shared fields just after `Subscriber Priority`), or we could make some other simplifying association here like saying that "the Group Order of the referenced Subscribe will be used." I don't think the latter would always be what we want though, so I'm inclined to just add the Group Order field back in here. I'll go ahead and do that shortly unless anyone strongly objects to reinstating that flexibility.

Author: OK, I added the Group Order field back in with [7db23b5](https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/638/commits/7db23b587cb0665ab4a60ccbe519238f11061b82) - it is no longer fixed to Ascending for Joining Fetch.

  Type (i) = 0x16,
  Length (i),
  Subscribe ID (i),
  Subscriber Priority (8),

>   Group Order (8),

Author: Yes, but it was requested that we continue to allow Group Order instead. I don't have strong feelings either way, but see the discussion here:

https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/638#discussion_r1927117659

>   Group Order (8),

Reviewer 5: SG, let's keep it as is for now.

  Type (i) = 0x16,
  Length (i),
  Subscribe ID (i),
  Subscriber Priority (8),
  Group Order (8),
  Fetch Type (i),
  [Track Namespace (tuple),
   Track Name Length (i),
   Track Name (..),
   StartGroup (i),
   StartObject (i),
   EndGroup (i),
   EndObject (i),]
  [Preceding Group Offset (i),]
  Number of Parameters (i),
  Parameters (..) ...
}
~~~
{: #moq-transport-fetch-format title="MOQT FETCH Message"}

Fields common to all Fetch Types:

* Subscribe ID: The Subscribe ID identifies a given fetch request. Subscribe ID
is a variable length integer that MUST be unique and monotonically increasing
within a session. For a Standalone Fetch a new Subscribe ID MUST be used. For

> a Joining Fetch, the Subscribe ID MUST correspond to a Subscribe which has already

Reviewer 5: If I cancel the Subscribe, does it cancel the Fetch?  I assume SUBSCRIBE_UPDATE doesn't have any impact on the Fetch?

Author: Canceling the Subscribe would not cancel the Fetch, but if you cancel the Subscribe before sending the Joining Fetch the Joining Fetch would fail with a FETCH_ERROR. SUBSCRIBE_UPDATE would only update the Subscribe with the given id, not the Fetch.

Author: Makes sense to me - added that clarifying language in [411d42e](https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/638/commits/411d42e864776007ce9d91ef867072bda705947b).

  Type (i) = 0x16,
  Length (i),
  Subscribe ID (i),
  Subscriber Priority (8),
  Group Order (8),
  Fetch Type (i),
  [Track Namespace (tuple),
   Track Name Length (i),
   Track Name (..),
   StartGroup (i),
   StartObject (i),
   EndGroup (i),
   EndObject (i),]

>   [Preceding Group Offset (i),]

Reviewer 4: in the joining case, I think we should add the subscribe ID of the associated subscribe

* EndObject: The end Object ID, plus 1. A value of 0 means the entire group is
requested.

Field present only for Joining Fetch (0x2):

* Preceding Group Offset: The group offset for the Fetch prior and relative

> to the StartGroup of the corresponding Subscribe. A value of 0 indicates

Reviewer 5: What if the StartGroup of the Subscribe is in the future?  The current text and algorithm below seem to indicate I could issue a joining fetch for Objects that haven't been published?

Author: That is a good point I had not previously considered. We probably should preclude joining a Fetch to a Subscribe in the future.

Author: Made a pass at limiting Joining Fetch to only Subscribes with the Latest Object Filter Type. It definitely reduces the complexity here quite a bit. See a70455e473f83a2d6e9381bd855ce06dbff5c1e4.

* EndObject: The end Object ID, plus 1. A value of 0 means the entire group is
requested.

> Field present only for Joining Fetch (0x2):

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Fields present only for Joining Fetch (0x2):
```

* Joining Subscribe ID: The Subscribe ID of the existing subscription to be
joined. If a publisher receives a Joining Fetch with a Subscribe ID that does
not correspond to an existing Subscribe, it MUST respond with a Fetch Error.

* Preceding Group Offset: The group offset for the Fetch prior and relative

> to the StartGroup of the corresponding Subscribe. A value of 0 indicates

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
to the Current Group of the corresponding Subscribe. A value of 0 indicates
```

> the current Group.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
the Fetch starts at the beginning of the Current Group.
```

* EndObject: The end Object ID, plus 1. A value of 0 means the entire group is
requested.

Field present only for Joining Fetch (0x2):

* Preceding Group Offset: The group offset for the Fetch prior and relative

> to the StartGroup of the corresponding Subscribe. A value of 0 indicates

Reviewer 3: s/StartGroup/Current Group , since joining fetch is always relative to the current group.

> the current Group.

Reviewer 3: s/the current Group / beginning of the current Group

If StartGroup/StartObject is greater than the latest published Object group,
the publisher MUST return FETCH_ERROR with error code 'No Objects'.

### Calculating the Range of a Joining Fetch

A publisher which receives a Fetch message with a Fetch Type of 0x2 treats it

> as a Fetch with a range dynamically determined by the Preceding Group Offset (PGO)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
as a Fetch with a range dynamically determined by the Preceding Group Offset
```
You don't use PGO elsewhere in the PR

Author: Hah, good point! Thanks!

  * For the Latest Group filter type, this is 0
  * For AbsoluteStart or AbsoluteRange filter types, this is the StartObject field
    of the SUBSCRIBE message
* Preceding Group Offset: A field in the Joining Fetch message indicating the
  relative offset from the start of the Subscribe

The Resolved Subscribe Start values for a Joining Fetch MUST correspond to the
referenced Subscribe within the same session so that the ranges of Objects covered
by the Fetch and Subscribe are contiguous and non-overlapping.
If no Objects have been published for the track, so the SUBSCRIBE_OK has a
ContentExists value of 0, the publisher MUST respond to the Joining Fetch with a
FETCH_ERROR.

The publisher receiving a Joining Fetch computes the fetch range as follows:

* Fetch StartGroup: Resolved Subscribe Start Group - Preceding Group Offset
* Fetch StartObject: 0

If Resolved Subscribe Start Object is 0:
* Fetch EndGroup: Resolved Subscribe Start Group - 1
* Fetch EndObject: 0 (all objects in the group)

Else, if Resolved Subscribe Start Object is 1 or more:
* Fetch EndGroup: Resolved Subscribe Start Group
* Fetch EndObject: Resolved Subscribe Start Object

> If Fetch EndGroup < Fetch StartGroup, there are no Objects to retrieve,

Reviewer 5: It's always true that if there are no Objects in the Fetch range, it results in a FETCH_ERROR, so I'm not sure we need to say it again here.  If you are going to restate it, I think Fetch EndGroup == Fetch StartGroup && Fetch EndObject < Fetch StartObject also results in a FETCH_ERROR?

Author: Removed in 
[c3442de](https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/638/commits/c3442de318bef65db36f27e6b70d4820d28b20ce). 

Would it be worth explicitly stating (again) that once these values are resolved, the Fetch is handled as an ordinary Standalone Fetch? I'm leaning towards 'no' since we already say something to that effect [above](https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/638/files#diff-7bc267642f4c6d5c039e5cd0ab26784907b240eb24ca1e9fedb4d5feccca49ffR1634-R1637).

> A publisher which receives a Fetch message with a Fetch Type of 0x2 treats it
> as a Fetch with a range dynamically determined by the Preceding Group Offset
> field and field values derived from the corresponding SUBSCRIBE message
> (hereafter "the Subscribe").

If StartGroup/StartObject is greater than the latest published Object group,
the publisher MUST return FETCH_ERROR with error code 'No Objects'.

### Calculating the Range of a Joining Fetch

A publisher which receives a Fetch message with a Fetch Type of 0x2 treats it
as a Fetch with a range dynamically determined by the Preceding Group Offset (PGO)
field and field values derived from the corresponding SUBSCRIBE message
(hereafter "the Subscribe").

The following values are used:

* Resolved Subscribe Start Group:
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type Latest Object or Latest Group,
    this is equal to Largest Group ID.
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type AbsoluteStart or AbsoluteRange,
    this is equal to the StartGroup field of the Subscribe message
* Resolved Subscribe Start Object:
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type Latest Object, this is equal to Largest Object ID.
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type Latest Group, this is 0
  * For Subscribes with Filter Type AbsoluteStart or AbsoluteRange,
    this is equal to the StartObject field of the Subscribe message

> * Preceding Group Offset: A field in the Joining Fetch message indicating the

Reviewer 5: This is defined above, so I think we can omit this definition here.

If StartGroup/StartObject is greater than the latest published Object group,
the publisher MUST return FETCH_ERROR with error code 'No Objects'.

### Calculating the Range of a Joining Fetch

A publisher which receives a Fetch message with a Fetch Type of 0x2 treats it
as a Fetch with a range dynamically determined by the Preceding Group Offset
field and field values derived from the corresponding SUBSCRIBE message
(hereafter "the Subscribe").

The following values are used:

* Resolved Subscribe Start Group: the Largest Group ID of the associated Subscribe.
* Resolved Subscribe Start Object: the Largest Object ID of the associated Subscribe.

> The Resolved Subscribe Start values for a Joining Fetch MUST correspond to the

Reviewer 5: Nit: I don't think you need a MUST here.  This is just explaining how the mechanism works and why.

```suggestion
The Resolved Subscribe Start values for a Joining Fetch correspond to the
```

Author: This is actually a requirement, but I see how it's easy to read it as just descriptive. The important part is the "within the same session" which precludes responding to Subscribe at relay, but forwarding the Joining Fetch and having it resolved against a different Subscribe at an upstream relay. We don't necessarily want to entirely preclude forwarding upstream, but it's important that the Joining Fetch be resolved **within the same session** as the associated Subscribe so that this join point is consistent.

This text originated after the [2024-12-18 weekly interim](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/minutes-interim-2024-moq-30-202412181700/) where the main issue raised (mainly by Cullen and Alan, if I recall correctly) was a desire to clarify requirements relating to forwarding behavior. My initial stab at text for that was in this commit: https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/commit/9dfceaf9c6e3bc71761a1f61ecfed2fed3357c7f followed by some discussion tightening it up here: https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/638#discussion_r1893250280

If this is too subtle, we could expand it a bit again or rephrase it to make the requirement more clear, but the MUST here is intentional.

Reviewer 5: I think everything in this document is in the context of a single session, except for some advice on relays, so I thought that aspect was a bit out of place.  For example, SUBSCRIBE_UPDATE and SUBSCRIBE_CANCEL don't clarify that you're altering a subscription within the session because it's implied.

If StartGroup/StartObject is greater than the latest published Object group,
the publisher MUST return FETCH_ERROR with error code 'No Objects'.

### Calculating the Range of a Joining Fetch

A publisher which receives a Fetch message with a Fetch Type of 0x2 treats it
as a Fetch with a range dynamically determined by the Preceding Group Offset
field and field values derived from the corresponding SUBSCRIBE message
(hereafter "the Subscribe").

The following values are used:

* Resolved Subscribe Start Group: the Largest Group ID of the associated Subscribe.
* Resolved Subscribe Start Object: the Largest Object ID of the associated Subscribe.

The Resolved Subscribe Start values for a Joining Fetch MUST correspond to the
referenced Subscribe within the same session so that the ranges of Objects covered
by the Fetch and Subscribe are contiguous and non-overlapping.
If no Objects have been published for the track, so the SUBSCRIBE_OK has a
ContentExists value of 0, the publisher MUST respond to the Joining Fetch with a
FETCH_ERROR.

The publisher receiving a Joining Fetch computes the fetch range as follows:

> * Fetch StartGroup: Resolved Subscribe Start Group - Preceding Group Offset

Reviewer 3: Since ResolveSubscribe Start Group is Largest Group ID of the subscription, it may be clearer if we don't introduce new terminology and just define as follows

Fetch StartGroup: Largest Subscribe  Group ID - Preceding Group Offset

Reviewer 3: same comment applies to the Resolved Subscribe Object too ?

The following values are used:

* Resolved Subscribe Start Group: the Largest Group ID of the associated Subscribe.
* Resolved Subscribe Start Object: the Largest Object ID of the associated Subscribe.

The Resolved Subscribe Start values for a Joining Fetch MUST correspond to the
referenced Subscribe within the same session so that the ranges of Objects covered
by the Fetch and Subscribe are contiguous and non-overlapping.
The Largest Group ID and Largest Object ID values from the corresponding
subscription are used to calculate the end of a Joining Fetch so the Objects
retrieved by the Fetch and Subscribe are contiguous and non-overlapping.
If no Objects have been published for the track, so the SUBSCRIBE_OK has a
ContentExists value of 0, the publisher MUST respond to the Joining Fetch with a
FETCH_ERROR.
ContentExists value of 0, the publisher responds with a FETCH_ERROR.

The publisher receiving a Joining Fetch computes the fetch range as follows:

* Fetch StartGroup: Resolved Subscribe Start Group - Preceding Group Offset
* Fetch StartGroup: Subscribe Largest Group - Preceding Group Offset
* Fetch StartObject: 0

If Resolved Subscribe Start Object is 0:

> * Fetch EndGroup: Resolved Subscribe Start Group - 1

Author: I think we do still need to handle this zero case separately.

e.g. Subscribe Largest Group = 3, Subscribe Largest Object = 0, Preceding Group Offset = 2

The new text here would have us create a Fetch with:
- StartGroup = 1
- StartObject = 0
- EndGroup = 3
- EndObject = 0

This would overlap an entire group since an EndObject of 0 in a Fetch means "all objects in the group"

I think the rest of the text consolidation here is fine, but we do need to keep this `- 1` for the Fetch EndGroup when Subscribe Largest Object is 0.
